this talk is on the subject of cosmic
rays and a little bit of a fascinating
topic in some ways especially if you're
interested at all in particle physics as
well as astronomy and the story of this
goes back about a hundred years to the
time when people were investigating
radioactivity and really trying to
understand what was going on
we now know is that these cosmic rays
are charged particles coming from space
and because they're charged electrically
charged are the positive or negative it
means that they get tangled up and
twisted around by the Earth's magnetic
field as they approach the earth and in
particular a charged particle will
spiral round a magnetic field line and
so when they finally do collide with the
earth it's quite difficult to work out
where they have come from because the
direction that they're heading has been
almost completely scrambled by the
interaction with the Earth's magnetic
field you can imagine a particle coming
in on a crazy helical spiral path like
that shown in the diagram there it's
difficult really to work out where it
originated from and that's more true for
the lower energy particles than the high
energy particles and makes some sense
the high energy particles are going so
fast and got so much momentum in a
straight line that the amount of
deflection they pick up before they
enter the Earth's atmosphere is
minimized whereas the more slow-moving
ones have got much more time to get spun
around in every possible direction on
phenomenon that we observe that has to
do with cosmic rays is really the aurora
the northern and southern lights and
this is a fantastic image of the aurora
over a lock up in the north of Scotland
in fact when it was a particularly
bright Aurora you've got that classic
green color and then trimmed around the
lower region of the curtain there you
have the purple color the green is from
atomic oxygen high up two hundred
thousand feet up in the atmosphere and
the sorry to two hundred kilometers up
in the atmosphere and the purple is
nitrogen molecules a bit lower down
that's why the curtains are always
trimmed at the bottom like that with the
the other color but we're not going to
talk too much about the aurora that's
the subject of a whole different lecture
here we're going to talk about the
cosmic rays and what we've learned about
them in a hundred and something years
since their discovery then as I said
they're high-energy very fast-moving
charged particles coming from space and
they hit the atmosphere and typically
start to collide with the thin
atmosphere up at about thirty kilometers
and start to break up and the primary
cosmic rays will collide and produce a
shower of secondary cosmic rays which
may even themselves undergo further
collisions and produce third and fourth
generation particles on the way down to
the ground and so one of the ways that
they've been studied is to go high and
use high-altitude balloons as shown in
the little diagram they're going way up
to try and carry instruments high into
the atmosphere and catch them before
they've had too many interactions on the
way down to try and decipher what's
going on
now the real discovery as I said goes
back to 1909 and 111 years ago now and a
Theodore wolf was measuring the amount
of radioactivity using an electron
which a charged device you put some
electric charge into this device and
then if it gets hit by charged particles
and ions from outside then it slowly
discharges the gold leaf electrode
inside the machine and you can see the
rate of decay of the charge telling you
the amount of radiation that there is
and he did the experiment by going to
the top of the Eiffel Tower and realized
that the difference in altitude made a
difference to the amount of radiation
and it was the wrong way around he was
expecting to get further away from the
earth that he would see a lower amount
of radiation because he thought the
radiation was coming from the ground
from the minerals and the heavy metals
like uranium and radium in the ground
material and he thought if he got away
from it he would see a lower value but
quite surprisingly that level of
radiation at the top of the tower was
higher and this then led to the idea of
checking it out at even higher altitudes
and some people went up mountains but in
particular three years later Victor
Hesse carried some of these wolf
electrometers up to five thousand three
hundred meters in a balloon you can see
him there stood in the basket that his
balloon before launch and he found that
the rate of ionization was four times
higher up there than it was at the
ground um and he also very cunningly
ruled out the Sun as the radiation
source by checking this out during a
near
total eclipse when the moon was blocking
the Sun in the sky
so it wasn't direct radiation coming
line-of-sight from the Sun that was
doing it it was more of an ambient
radiation coming from elsewhere but they
still hadn't really got much of a handle
on what these particles were and Robert
Millikan was the person who came up with
the name cosmic rays and he particularly
he used the word ray in the same context
that they use x-ray and gamma ray for
high-energy radiation of the
electromagnetic wave type because he
thought that the effect was ionization
of the air by high-energy x-rays and
gamma rays coming from space they would
knock the electrons off the atoms in the
air molecules create the charged
particles and hence be detected by the
electrometer machines now the
interesting clue came when jacob clay
was sailing from java back home to the
netherlands in 1927 and he discovered
that the cosmic ray intensity depended
not only on your altitude but also where
you were on the earth in terms of
latitude and it increased from the
tropics to mid latitudes and from that
he figured that perhaps that primary
cosmic rays were being deflected by the
Earth's magnetic field and deflected
away around the tropics and towards the
polar regions and figured that that must
mean that they were charged particles
not electromagnetic photons x-rays or
gamma rays because those are
electrically neutral and are not
deflected by a magnetic field
now what little photo up here showing
that we are still at it investigating
these phenomenon using balloons this is
Bess the payload here being low low
ready to launch up on the bottom of that
balloon high up into the atmosphere to
study exactly what's coming down from
space but as it was really in the 1930s
that we first confirmed that the flux of
cosmic rays was mostly protons the
hydrogen atom nuclei in single particles
with a positive charge coming from space
with very high velocity and then they
would crash into particles in the
Earth's atmosphere and create the shower
of secondary radiation which would be
composed of a whole lot of different
radiation so electrons photons
electromagnetic radiation gamma rays and
so on and muons which are the heavier
cousin of the electron carrying one unit
of charge
I also get other things as well pi ons
and neutrinos and all sorts of things
get created
and in 1948 experiments with nuclear
emulsions so films specifically designed
to detect the passage of nuclei through
them a technique that had been developed
by the particle physicists we're able to
show that about 10% of the primary's
high up in the atmosphere were actually
helium nuclei or alpha particles as
they're sometimes called so two protons
and two neutrons with a plus two
positive charge in the nucleus the
center of a helium atom and also 1% were
quite interestingly made of heavier
elements so things like carbon and iron
and even heavy elements like lead
occasionally and that's interesting
because what's rather suggestive of
where this stuff is coming from
now the obvious next step was really to
go to space and have a look from air and
so in 1958 the Explorer one mission had
a cosmic ray detector carried with it
and it was able to detect lots of
protons coming in with very high energy
30 million electron volts an electron
volt is a measure of energy and it was
able to detect electrons coming in at
1/10 of that as well three-month REE MeV
but so high was the flux at some points
on the orbit of Explorer 1 that's the
instruments became saturated showing
that the level of activity and radiation
out there in space was really quite
tremendous and this was the discovery of
the Van Allen radiation belts man Allen
had suggested that they might be there
and that the Earth's magnetic field
might act as a giant particle trap and
he was indeed right the earth is
surrounded by these belts of intense
radiation and it's interesting that that
they lie mostly in the plane of the
equator and not so much at the poles but
they had to take these into account when
planning the Apollo missions to fly to
the moon and try and arrange for the
orbit to pass as little as possible
through the intense parts of the Van
Allen belts otherwise they'd have fried
the astronauts
and muons which come in from the
secondary particle stream coming in
being created on the way down by perhaps
as in this diagram a single high-energy
proton hits the atmosphere and creates
this shower and where it says Moo coming
down that's a muon and these were
discovered and studied very intensely
because of a rather strange piece of
behavior we discovered muons in the lab
in cloud chambers and other instruments
and were able to work out that they were
a heavier version of the electron
they're 206 times heavier than an
ordinary electron but otherwise pretty
much indistinguishable from them and the
curious thing was that in the laboratory
they only live for two microseconds
before they decay into an electron
they give out a neutrino in the process
in fact urn muon anti neutrino gets
created but the the decay happens on
average with a half-life of two
microseconds now this is rather curious
because they're generated in the
atmosphere about 10 kilometers up and
they're moving at almost the speed of
light 99.9 puts 9% of the speed of light
yet we detect them on the ground and
they shouldn't be able to do that
because it should take them more than
two microseconds to make it to the
ground you can work it out and I've done
the little calculation here the speed of
light is 300 million meters per second
so in two millionths of a second they
can travel six hundred meters two times
three hundred and the millions all
cancel out so how is it that they're
managing to be created ten thousand
meters up and reach the ground when they
should have decayed sometime in the
first six hundred or perhaps 1,200
meters we should have lost most of them
through this 2 micro second half-life
and it turns out that you need use
Einstein's relativity and the fact that
because they're traveling so fast near
the speed of light their clocks run very
much more slowly you can plumb the
numbers into the equation on the right
there where V is the speed and C is the
speed of light and you can see V squared
over C squared is almost equal to 1 so 1
minus something that's almost 1 is a
very small number so you end up dividing
by the square root of almost nothing and
you will get a very larger time dilation
factor it works out if you do it
properly
you get a factor of 70 slowing down of
the muons clock which allows them to
actually travel
not 600 meters but 42,000 meters on
average before they decay and that
explains it but it's also an extremely
good piece of evidence for why
relativity and all this time dilation
effects are actually correct
another effect of these particles
traveling so fast is that they are
actually traveling faster than light can
travel in air you're not allowed to
exceed the speed of light in a vacuum
but even light slows down from their
ultimate speed limits when it enters
things like air or water basically the
refractive index of the material is the
ratio of its speed in that material to
the speed in a vacuum and the charged
particles can be going faster than the
local speed of light and that's
perfectly okay with relativity but it
causes the particles to give off a
shower of strong blue light called
of radiation and so you get a cone of
this blue light coming out of the sky
when a particle enters the atmosphere
it's too faint for us to see with the
naked eye become it's spectacular
otherwise but on the left there
underneath the the title there is a
picture of a nuclear reactor and that is
creating a sharing of radiation from all
of the high-energy particles being spat
out of the reactor moving faster than
the local speed of light in the water in
which the whole thing is suspended
you often see that blue light associated
with these water-cooled reactors in the
movies and so on
and it's evidence of these particles
going faster than light as I say we have
these showers of particles coming down
and there's a variety of ways of trying
to detect them
you can try and trap them from the
ground you can try to trap them with
multiple detectors and catch the whole
shower and you can stack the detectors
by putting some on the ground and some
underneath and see if you can see the
same particle come through one of the
detectors and into a second one and if
you can do that then you might get a
handle on the direction that it's
traveling or you can look for the shrink
of radiation using fairly short focused
telescopes a fairly straightforward
optical method and try and piece
together exactly what's going on and if
you really want to measure the highest
energy particles then actually it's well
worth burying your equipment it's quite
deep underground to try and screen out
all of the other effects that might be
going on so there's a number of
different strategies for this this is
the Veritas array of sharing cough
radiation detectors so there lots of
mirrors looking for that flash of blue
light and it's very directional because
the light travels in straight lines and
so these telescopes can focus it and
work out where the particles have come
from the
these are the detectors of the Pierre
auger Observatory which has been
operating for 20 years now looking for
cosmic rays
they look like chem that's some sort of
sewage units don't they all scattered
around these small tanks of material in
which the detection is made and that the
panel's there are just the solar panels
used for powering these things they're
scattered around all over the desert out
there in in Chile and it's got a very
nice little Observatory building out
there in the left-hand corner looks like
one nice place to work really some ways
then we've got their fly's eye this
looks like the leftovers from some sort
of Jamaican steel band with all these
giant oil drum affairs which are trying
to look for the both the shrink of
radiation and other effects coming from
the sky and then well those are the
surface bound ones itself all we have
the IceCube Observatory and this really
is at the South Pole in Antarctica at 89
degrees 59 minutes and 24 seconds south
so it's only what is it 36 arc seconds
away from the actual pole which makes
quoting the other figure 63 degrees 27
minutes 11 wet west largely irrelevant
if only they'd put it exactly at the
pole you wouldn't need to quote that at
all but amazing that we've actually got
this installation right down there
almost at the South Pole and the same
ice cube comes from the fact that it is
a cubic kilometer of ice that is being
used as the detector they what they've
done is drilled down 86 cores into this
cubic kilometer are very pure very
translucent
and each string has multiple detectors
hanging from it suspended in that ice
looking for the blue flashes of light
the stirring cough radiation of the
particle entering the ice there and
triggering off a flash and with a larae
of several thousand detectors you can
very nicely measure the energy and the
direction from which the particle must
have come and get a handle on what type
of particle it was the speed it was
moving and even the direction
this is one of the little sensors and
say there are several thousand of these
suspended down in in the body of that
ice underneath now rather curiously the
Ice Cube telescope actually is detecting
both cosmic rays which come from all
around the earth but don't tend to be
able to make it through the earth so it
tends to be observing them coming to it
from the southern hemisphere but it's
also sensitive to neutrinos the light
weight neutral will of the wisp
particles that get created in nuclear
reactions and these can come at it
either from above with the cosmic rays
or because they interact so weakly with
ordinary matter they can come right
through the earth and so it turns out
that being at the South Pole
it's a very good neutrino telescope for
looking at the northern hemisphere which
is a bit bit bonkers really and but
anyway it picks up both of these using
the flash of light received by their
detectors there
so what what have we managed to discover
with all of it Oh to detect the moon
that's always a good start this is an
image of the moon showing the shadow of
the cosmic rays being blocked by the
moon so that same experiment that was
done by Hess looking at an eclipse and
seeing that the cosmic rays didn't come
from the Sun well this is the equivalent
here we're looking at the shadow of the
moon's blocking the cosmic rays coming
from at least as far away as the moon
and we've done the same thing here
looking at the light side of the moon
because the gamma rays hit the moon and
they release sorry the cosmic rays hit
the moon and release radiation including
gamma rays which come our way and so
we've imaged the gamma rays produced
bouncing off the surface of the Moon as
a result of the bombardment
no detecting the moon is not a
particularly challenging astronomical
observation what about their sources
well the Sun obviously is a source of
high-energy particles not only does it
give off light of a variety of
wavelengths from x-rays through to long
wave infrared radio waves optical
obviously
well there's a stream of high-energy
charged particles coming from it all the
time in the form of the solar wind and
occasionally much larger ejections in
great gulps of material are thrown out
by eruptions on the Sun and those
sometimes come our way and interact with
the Earth's magnetic fields and create
the aurora and all sorts of other
effects as well in fact we can see in
the next chart a correlation between
various different effects so we've got
different charts over a period here of
some 30 years
what with the sunspots count in the top
one so you can see the Sun number of
sunspots rises and falls and rises and
falls in this supposedly 11-year cycle
although the last rise and was a bit
pathetic and actually we seem to be
stuck in a bit of a minimum now in the
period into 2020 something strange going
on but you can see that the cosmic rays
detected there by their detector in
Moscow have gone in one direction and
then the other in the second chart and
that's reflective of the fact that in
the sunspot cycle what is happening on
the Sun is that the sun's magnetic field
flips from north to south and south to
north every cycle so each phase of it
the magnetic field of the Sun is
pointing in the opposite direction and
that's affecting the charged particles
coming in in form of cosmic rays and
then we've got the x-rays which mostly
come from the Sun and are correlated
with sunspots very nicely and protons
you can see we get more protons coming
in during sunspot activity than not and
then the magnetic trace at the bottom
okay so what about cosmic ace from
beyond the Sun from further afield from
deep space well this is an meet here of
Tycho's supernova and some strange
creature has appeared on top of it
that's interesting but so tacos
supernova was seeded 1572 and the
expanding shockwave outwards round the
rim there is accelerating particles to
near light speed and we've detected
cosmic rays coming from the direction of
this supernova remnant so that confirmed
something that we thought was probably
true that the material is coming from
these high-energy events and in
particular the explosion of dying stars
they supernova we suspected that because
we saw not only the protons and the
helium nuclei hydrogen and helium nuclei
coming to us but are everywhere and make
up most of the universe but also the
presence of those iron and carbon and
heavier elements like lead those are
made in the shockwave of supernovae in
the extreme temperatures that are
created and extreme Neutron fluxes that
you get that bruise up but all all the
heavier elements and so it's no surprise
that we would see those if it was
associated with supernovae they also
detected this object ta X s o5 o 6 plus
o 5 6 which is what's called a blazar
which is an active feeding supermassive
black hole in the center of a distant
galaxy 5.7 billion light-years away
across the universe somewhere in the
direction of the constellation of Orion
and it's creating a few Rory is a huge
amount of material being sucked towards
and divided
by the black hole and black holes are
very messy eaters if you listen to my
talk on black holes I talked about this
they throw enormous jets out along their
magnetic spin axes while they're feeding
this is not material from inside the
black hole it's material from the
process of accreting it towards the
black hole it gets tangled up in the
magnetic field and shot out in these
enormous jets and he turns out that this
particular blazer
we're in the line of sight of one of
those Jets so it looks very bright to us
a few years ago now in 1987 we detected
this object supernova 1987a in the Large
Magellanic Cloud which is a Worf galaxy
that orbits around the Milky Way galaxy
160,000 light years away from us and it
was a type 2 supernova a core collapse
of a giant star and this is measured way
with the Russian detector there they get
cous yahood soft detector as measured a
flux of energy coming in cosmic rays
from this particular direction since
1978 and then suddenly 1996 there was a
45 percent increase in the flux of heavy
particles coming into the detector and a
lot of them are iron nuclei and again
the characteristic signature of a
supernova explosion and then 14 years
later we're back down to the original
flux in 2010 so we think that this sort
came from the supernova and it's
interesting because it means that the
detection delay of 9 years from when we
saw the supernova go bang with cameras
and saw the gamma rays and the neutrino
and all the other speed of light
particles arriving they took another
nine years before the flux of cosmic
rays went up and from that we can work
out that they're traveling at 99.999 5%
the speed of light because they'd only
lost nine years in a journey of a
hundred and sixty thousand light years
so very very very nearly traveling at
the speed of light
this is an experiment that's actually
sim software was written by a company
belong to Associates of mine
the AMSO 1 and O 2 antimatter detectors
that are up on the space shuttle run
some software written in Cambridge sir
and what they're looking for is this
weird stuff called antimatter the mirror
equivalent to ordinary matter where you
have anti protons with positive charge
in the nucleus and anti electrons with a
positive charge going around them so the
antiprotons are negative and the anti
electrons we sometimes call positrons as
they're positively charged and indeed it
managed to detect an abundance of anti
protons coming in along with the
radiation not as many as there are
protons by several orders of or several
tens of orders of magnitude but enough
to be sure that they're there and
possibly a few anti helium nuclei and
not absolutely sure if that was a very
low amount of flux from them the other
thing that they're looking at is to see
whether there's any evidence of dark
matter out there everybody's looking for
this and the a.m. so2 has confirmed in
excess of high-energy positrons
consistent perhaps with these weird
particles called neutral Eno's which are
a prediction of string theory but not
managed to confirm it to the point of
ruling out other explanations such as
the positrons having been created by
ordinary pulsars neutron stars are also
looking for strangelets which are
particles of matter that contain quarks
that make up the protons and neutrons
except they contain a third type of
quark the normal protons and neutrons
are made of two up quarks and a down
quark or two down quarks and an up quark
to give you the neutron and the proton
but there is a third type of quark
called a strange quark and i talked
about that in a lecture I gave on
strange stars and quark stars which and
possibly going to be the subject of
another video at some point
anyway so they haven't managed to detect
any of those yet but it's interesting
that we're looking for all of these
different weird and wonderful possible
types of cosmic ray particle now cosmic
rays turn out to have a role actually in
messing around with the composition of
the universe we've talked about how the
Big Bang makes hydrogen and helium and a
little bit of some of the other elements
a little bit of lithium and not much
beyond that and then stars take over and
make carbon by fusing three helium's
together but they don't produce the
intervening elements elements four and
five beryllium and boron and that's they
skip over and go straight to carbon by
fusing three helium's together and then
giant stars work on that and build up
all of the others but it turns out that
cosmic rays are quite good it's smashing
into oxygen atoms and carbon atoms and
things like that in our atmosphere or
even out in space and splitting them up
they've got enough energy to smash them
and you can see in the diagram here an
oxygen nucleus being smashed and it's
creating a helium and a spare Neutron a
beryllium 10 so element number four
there and a proton and a neutrino coming
out to balance things and so this
process tends to actually account for
quite a lot of why we have some of the
light elements that we find on earth
like lithium and beryllium and boron in
the amounts that we do is because
they're created out in space or in the
upper atmosphere and rain down as a
result of these cosmic rays and if you
think perhaps
all this radiation is a little bit
dangerous well let's have a look at that
it's possible that 2.6 million years ago
there was a cosmic event that rained
iron-60 a radioactive isotope of iron
onto earth in the form of cosmic rays
probably from a giant supernova not too
far away and that was has been detected
in the sediments of that period and
around about that 2.6 million years ago
we saw a number of species go extinct
including the giant Megalodon shark
there's the fossilized jaws of that
shark if you thought the shark in Jaws
was terrifying well this one was an
absolute monster and in addition we have
to take account of cosmic rays because
they crash into the nuclei in our
atmosphere and create the radioactive
isotope carbon-14 which then gets
trapped in living things and we use it
for dating how long it has been since a
particular organism or fossil has been
alive by measuring how much carbon-14
there is in it because it decays in a
nice predictable way and the cosmic ray
flux keeps the amount of carbon-14 more
or less constant over time in the
atmosphere we did interfere with that
somewhat in the 1950s and 60s with all
the atmospheric atomic bomb tests and
you can see that in the signatures and
so when dating we have to allow for that
these days
so it does cause effects down here on on
the ground that are useful and
interesting really really high-energy
side of things though well the picture
on the top right is the cosmic microwave
background radiation this low
temperature 2.7 degrees Kelvin low
energy microwaves that flood the
universe
none of the heat signature of the Big
Bang the leftover heat signature and
that can interact with cosmic rays as
these high-energy particles are tearing
through the space deep space they can
have interactions with the photons of
the the Cosmic Microwave Background and
that causes the cosmic rays to lose
energy they actually end up spitting out
particles called ions and to a lesser
effect at lower energy they can create
electrons and positrons as well but
essentially it's the apollyon creating
process that is most sapping of the
energy of the cosmic rays and it means
that there's an upper limit to the
energy of a cosmic ray after it's
traveled a long way across the universe
and that's this number right at the top
here it's an enormous number 5 times 10
to the power 19 electron volts that's a
huge number of amount of energy for a
particle to be carrying and again we've
begin to be be detecting that signature
down here using a combination of some of
those telescopes high rares and the
Pierre auger experiments have all been
looking at this to see if they can
detect the flux of cosmic rays dropping
away as energy now it looks like it does
so it's confirming the theory
now look out now with some of the
detectors like ice cube we can get a
heat map of the direction of travel to
some extent of the cosmic rays and as
you see it's not uniform they seem to
come from more from some directions
shown in red there as though the hot
parts of the heat map compared to the
big cold blue spots so it's definite
directionality to this but that really
isn't telling us a huge amount about
what's going on it's as I said quite
difficult to track exactly where they're
coming from unless they've got very high
energy and come crashing through the
Earth's magnetic field and sometimes
that does happen so for the really
high-energy ones where you've got to
tend to the power 20 electron volts we
have managed to detect them and they're
not scrambled by the Earth's magnetic
field and so that's how we've managed to
pick them up as having come from some of
the Milky Way and some of the dwarf
galaxies like the Large Magellanic Cloud
here from just outside the Milky Way as
in the case of supernova 1987a
though this was the record holder so far
it was 3.1 2 times 10 to the 20 electron
volts so that's seven times over the
Linnet to have come from a very distant
galaxy so probably didn't it probably
came from somewhere a bit more local
probably didn't travel more than maybe a
hundred and fifty light-years to get
here
sorry hundred 50 million light years to
get here and we managed to locate it
coming from somewhere in the Great Bear
in Ursa Major as shown in that heat map
at the bottom managed to pin it down the
energy of that single particle was the
same energy as a cricket ball being
bowled at 90 miles an hour so it's quite
a lot of punch that it was packing for a
single particle and fascinating that
it's coming in from some source
moderately local to the Milky Way in in
our local bubble really now I mentioned
earlier how they routed the astronauts
to the moon avoiding the worst of the
radiation from the Van Allen belts but
there was nothing they could do to stop
them being hit by cosmic rays while they
were on route to the moon taking three
days there and three days back plus the
time spent on the moon and while I would
in that translunar part of the journey
they were outside that magnetic bubble
that protects the earth from most of the
cosmic rays and they started to see
these flashes which are illustrated in
the little black circles there even with
their eyes shut and these were cosmic
rays crashing into the astronauts and
triggering this light show either in the
retina or the eyeball itself exploding
inside the eyeball or hitting the optic
nerve and triggering that off or indeed
the brain and it actually was quite a
nuisance because it made it rather
difficult
for them to sleep because they would be
one of these about every three minutes
that they would see sudden flash of
light
and there was no getting away from it so
what about the the danger and the
exposure levels then well down at sea
level where we live there's the top box
there shows how much radiation that we
get from cosmic radiation and this is a
logarithmic plot you can see it goes
naught point one one ten a hundred a
thousand so the bars that are longer are
vastly greater than the short ones in
terms of total flux you can see that if
you go and have a CT scan you get
perhaps what is it ten times as much
the limits for a safety for a worker
there's a little bit more than that in
the green bar if you go up onto the
International Space Station for six
months you're still inside the
protective bubble of the Earth's
atmosphere but you can see their numbers
are really beginning to climb and if you
were to try to fly to Mars well you're
getting a very large dose during the six
month transit time and then if you had
to stay on Mars for a year and a bit
until the alignment was right for you to
come home you'd get another whopping
dose for 500 days on Mars they're
talking of Mars I've been using the Mars
Science Laboratory the rover to measure
the radiation actually on the surface of
Mars and so you can see in other units
here on earth naught point six two REMS
per year on the space station it's eight
REMS per year roughly ten times as much
and on the surface of Mars it's ten to
twenty depending on where you are on
Mars actually quite significantly
depends on your whether you're on a bit
of high ground on Mars or whether you're
in one of the dip
Russians because they atmosphere on Mars
is much thicker in places like the deep
blue region there the helis basin and of
course Mars has a very weak magnetic
field so that's where the real problem
is coming from it's not protecting you
all Mars's atmosphere and Martha's
atmosphere has been stripped of water by
the ravages of all the cosmic rays from
the Sun and elsewhere but yeah a flight
to Mars 20 REMS per year so you'd get
another 20 just flying there and back
and around about 200 REMS is thought to
be the limits so you'd have to protect
yourself if you went to try and live on
Mars because otherwise in a matter of 10
years or so things would not be looking
good for you and so I think we probably
have to bury ourselves under you know
several meters of Martian rock and dust
in Martian habitats to avoid the problem
of cosmic rays but we're also going to
have to do something about the exposure
on the time of flights to get there
which is going to be really rather too
much for most people to want to put up
with if they want to go and spend some
time on the Red Planet
anyway you very much for listening
that's the end of my presentation about
cosmic rays